Computers have become so necessary to modern living that it is difficult to believe that they are a relatively recent invention. We cannot live without computers, as they are involved in most of the everyday options. It’s really hard to imagine a life without computers. In schools, students use computers to learn and teachers use computer in their teachings. All they need to do is just sit in front of the monitor and click the mouse. That means computers make the learning and teaching processes more efficient. As a result, students are all better educated. Although some people may complain students of becoming less concentrated on the lessons if computers are used, it is not the problem of using computers. That is the problem of the students’ behaviours. We cannot blame the computers, as it is the responsibility of students. In offices, businessmen use computers to trade with other companies, especially those who are overseas. They can communicate with each other in a short time. Thus, trades can be finished in a more efficient way. Besides, they can collect the most up-to-date financial information from the Internet so that they can make the best decision. Moreover, computers are used to control the operation of machines. Therefore, the productivity of companies can be highly increased. According to a survey report, the computer-related medical claims had a 5% increase within the last two years, therefore it suggested us not to use computers in offices. However, illnesses are brought by the inappropriate computer-aid working facilities. Illnesses can be combated by using ergonomic desks or chairs. In transportations, computers are used to control trains, ships and even the planes. The use of computers makes the itinerary more steady and safe. Since these computer systems are very reliable, pressures of the divers can be reduced. On the other hand, computers are used to control the traffic lights. They can accurately assign time for pedestrians and vehicles. They contribute to our transport system. It is believed that computer system may be out of order, and unreliable. We should not rely on them too much. It may be true to a certain extent. However the convenience that computer brought to us cannot be neglected. Also they rarely become out of order. Since the convenience out weight the problems, computers still bring us more benefits. Furthermore, computers together with Internet save one’s time. That is we can pay the electricity, telephone, water, and town gas bills without going out. We can make appointments through the Internet too, e.g. making smart ID and booking of stadium. Also we can renew books. All these services are provided simply just by logging into your own account. Although hackers may log on to personal data in some web’s database, most of the government webs and bank webs have set up a well-secured computer system to protect customers’ personal data. Therefore we don’t need to worry about that. To conclude, computers are our tools to create a better society to live in. They have already taken a vital role in our society. This only means computers bring us more benefits than problems. In today’s world, science is just not a word, in every aspect of our life there must be some role that science plays. In every point of our life, we must use some machine, some scientific things which we do even not know that it is included in our daily ways. We must say that science came a long way from ancient time to the present day of our life. Nowadays, science has no limit. Science is a Latin word which means knowledge. Science has roots from Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia around 3500 to 3000 BCE. Science is the reason behind our success to reach on Moon, Mars and other parts of the space. At the present time, we are able to get the knowledge about various parts of the universe. The term scientist was given by Willam Whewell in 1883. Scientist are the ones who conduct scientific research to extend the knowledge as per their area of interest. There are many scientists like Galileo Galilei (referred as the father of modern astronomy and the father of modern physics), Sir Isaac Newton who gave Newtonian mechanics, equation of motion and many more, Albert Einstein who gave us the theory of relativity which is one of the two pillars of modern physics and he also gave popular philosophy, Marie Curie, Charles Darwin, C.V. Raman, Srinivasa Ramanujan and many more. In previous time there was no medium of communication from one part of the world to another. But in the present time, there is a mobile phone, laptop, computers, satellite, etc. through which we can communicate with anyone at any time at any place. The computer and laptops that we use today so travel friendly that we can carry laptops in our bags. But when the first computer made by Charles Babbage was introduced it was too large that we cannot move that computer. After many further invention leads to the modern computer, we use nowadays. In the case of computer, science came a long way. Mobile is another gadget which is a gift of science. Because of mobile, we are able to communicate through any person by our voice. Even because of this, any two-person can talk face to face sitting at their respective places. All invention is only because of science. Once that was the time when if any person needs to travel, it just takes lots of time to reach the destination but at present because of the aeroplane, train it takes very less time to travel. In communication, these are the basics we use. There are various branch of science. These are physics, chemistry, biology, social science, and many more. In physics, there are numerous branches which includes mechanics, optics, electronics and the most important astrophysics. Because of physics, we are now able to make cars, aeroplanes, house appliances and many others. It is a gift of science that now we are able to cure any disease like cancer with the help of medicine and by doing operations. Our science technology improves at such extent that in past human did not know that how fire catches but at present with just one matchstick fire catches in just a few seconds. Although science is very useful for us but for every time? Maybe not. Although science technology like mobile is very useful in terms of communication but the excess use of mobile is not good especially for children. Laptop, computer and mobiles are losing interest in the outdoor game which is not good for children’s physical improvement. In fact, the excess use of mobile causes the loss of their mental growth. Lots of invention in science technology led to the loss of life also. The inventions of bomb, weapon and many gadgets like guns etc. cause a loss of innocent lives. Suppose when a bomb is released by terrorist, thousands of innocent people loss their lives. Not only human but animal suffer also because of this technology. Because of mobile tower radiation birds experience electromagnetic force when they pass by the tower and this force is very harmful for them which causes the extinction of birds and bees from that area. Even these rays are harmful for human also. Some product which includes radioactive materials are very injurious for the human body and even cause cancer which led to the loss of lives. Mathematics is one of the common subjects that we study since our childhood. It is generally used in our daily life. Every person needs to learn some basics of it. Even counting money also includes math. Every work is linked with math in some way or the other. A person who does math is called a Mathematician. Mathematics can be divided into two parts. The first is Pure mathematics, and the second is Applied mathematics. In Pure mathematics, we need to study the basic concept and structures of mathematics. But, on the other side, Applied mathematics involves the application of mathematics to solve problems that arise in various areas,(e.g.), science, engineering, and so on. One couldn’t imagine the world without math. Math makes our life systematic, and every invention involves math. No matter what action a person is doing, he should know some basic maths. Every profession involves maths. Our present-day world runs on computers, and even computer runs with the help of maths. Every development that happens requires math. Mathematics has a wide range of applications in our daily life. Maths generally deals with numbers. There are various topics in math, such as trigonometry; integration; differentiation, etc. All the subjects such as physics; chemistry; economy; commerce involve maths in some way or the other. Math is also used to find the relation between two numbers, and math is considered to be one of the most challenging subjects to learn. Math includes various numbers, and many symbols are used to show the relation between two different numbers. Math is complicated to learn, and one needs to focus and concentrate more. Math is logical sometimes, and the logic needs to be derived out. Maths make our life easier and more straightforward. Math is considered to be challenging because it consists of many formulas that have to be learned, and many symbols and each symbol generally has its significance. New Zealand is a land of magnificent and unordinary beauty. This is a wonderful place to learn English, enjoy nature and go mountain-skiing. It is no secret that "The Lord of The Rings" was shot in New Zealand – the nature of New Zealand so closely resembles the magical country! If you are keen on active tourism, you can find all the necessary facilities for hiking, mountain-skiing, rafting and many other kinds of sports here. The country’s distinguishing characteristic is the beauty of its nature. Make your dreams come true! Swim together with dolphins, admire whales, and go fishing! New Zealand is an island country but the sizes of the islands are not large, so it is quite easy and pleasant to travel about/around (not really sure of ‘about/around) regardless of what means of transport you use – a car, a bus, or even a bicycle. New Zealand culture is quite unordinary. New Zealanders represent a mix of Europeans and the Maoris. They are very friendly and hospitable. A foreigner will be surprised by being greeted on the street by complete strangers. The atmosphere of relaxation and peacefulness prevails everywhere in New Zealand. The murder rate is extremely low compared to any other country of the world and the bribery rate among governmental workers is the lowest in the world (supposedly, there is no such thing as bribes in New Zealand at all). By the way, governmental ministers do not have body guards or escorts. Naturally, making an appointment with one of them is quite easy. Sometimes you can even meet a minister while standing in line in a supermarket. Another practical thing you should know about when you are in New Zealand – you should not give tips in hotels, restaurants etc. because tips are uncommon here. The local art and culture originated by combining things that cannot normally be combined, hence their passing resemblance to common cultures and arts. Wellington, the capital of New Zealand, is situated in the wonderful harbor on the edge of the "Northern" island. Guidebooks recommend paying particular attention to the following sights. These are: the modernistic building of the executive branch of the Parliament – Beehive, the ancient building of the government (one of the biggest buildings in the world made completely from wood), the National Library with an excellent collection of literature, Catherine Mansfield’s Memorial, and more. There are a few interesting museums such as the Maori Museum called "Te Papa" in Wellington. But the place that is definitely worth a visit is located not far from the capital. It is Mount Victoria. You can come in sight of the mountain from the city’s streets. What an impressive sight! What is the best time to go to New Zealand? Owing to the favorable location, New Zealand’s climate is fairly mild the whole year, so you can visit the country any time of the year. However, they usually emphasize the "main" season – November through April. There are a lot of tourists arriving at this time of the year, so it is quite reasonable to reserve a hotel room in advance. If you like mountain-skiing, the best time for you to come is winter – June through August. In general, if you can come any time of the year, we advise you come before or after the main season. The weather is pretty warm but there are no crowds of tourists and you can go sightseeing anywhere you want without having to care about the availability of tickets. Today there are about 7 billion people in this world. With that many people it is pretty amazing that each one of us is unique in our own way. Contrast to our individualities, however, we tend to create this "perfect person" that everyone should aim to achieve within our societies. By doing this we almost set ourselves up for failure, seeing that nothing in life is perfect. However, what a lot of people don’t realize is that imperfections and individualities that are in all of us and are the free measure at our successes in life. Being a leader rather than a follower is something not many people know the difference between. Politics is a great example; it is a good thing that we have different parties so we can get the opinions from a different side. However, religion is another topic where individuality is key. Our society considers someone who stands up for their faith and doesn’t back down an accomplished person; yet frowns upon it in schools.  Contrary to what we should do, society tends to rate and judge others greatly. Though we may be a bit different and differ in opinions we all should be treated equally, just as our founding fathers wrote it. The society we have built for today scares many people because we are sometimes subconsciously told to be a certain way or to do a certain thing and we are losing our ability at freedom to be who we are.  Contrary to what we should do, society tends to rate and judge others greatly. Though we may be a bit different and differ in opinions we all should be treated equally, just as our founding fathers wrote it. The society we have built for today scares many people because we are sometimes subconsciously told to be a certain way or to do a certain thing and we are losing our ability at freedom to be who we are. Expressing yourself is a great thing but there is a line that has to be drawn between what people are telling you and what your actual beliefs are. Today what is shown on TV, magazines, or any kid of media site is ridiculous. The celebrities that our children look up to are stars doing drugs, alcohol, dancing in disturbing. If children are being told that this is what our society likes, they might be scared to admit their true selves. Fitness and health is a wonderful thing, and people really should be healthy; but to a certain extent. The fact that kids, young teenage girls in particular are harming themselves or starving themselves because they don’t look like a supermodel they saw in a magazine causes serious mental and emotional problems. How much of an impact our world can have on us, causing diseases such as Bulimia, or causing young men to take steroids, is an extremely unappealing thought. Embracing uniqueness and individuality is ideally what should be encouraged. Maybe you didn’t get into the smartest college, or have the biggest house, but you should be proud of yourself for trying because growing up in this world can be difficult, like Emerson once said "to be yourself in a world that is constantly trying to make you something else is the greatest accomplishment". I agree with that 100 percent. The relationship between religion and politics continues to be an important topic in modern American society. In a radical act, the Constitution not only guaranteed religious freedom, it also stated that the United States would not have a national church and would not have religious tests for the national office. However, in American political life there are factors that enhance the role of religion in a way that isn’t observed in other developed countries. In the article "How Politics Affects Religion: Partisanship, Socialization, and Religiosity in America," Michele F. Margolis highlights the theory of the life cycle of religion and politics. Scholars point out that social identities can shape political attitudes and behaviors. This article explores the feedback, whether there are strong sides of party identity in order to influence engagement in a politically important social group. Politics can affect the level of religiosity at a certain time in their lives, "when people are in the process of raising children – a time that encourages many to make decisions associated with their religious identities – their partisanship may influence these religious choices". The article "Christian Theology and Attitudes Toward Political and Religious Ideological Groups," examines the influence of Christian theology on the attitudes toward different ideological groups, both political and religious. These articles address some of the problems that arise in different ways between religion and politics. In the United States, religious identity often correlates with political identity, because religious differences are clearly visible in party politics. Politics is not only a competition for power, and not only a selection of performers; it is a base of values on how to live together. In many ways, today’s America is more Christian than any previous moment in its history. Christianity is responsible for the way our society is organized and for the way we currently live. Christian contribution is extensive to our laws, our economics, our politics, our arts, our calendar, our holidays, and our moral and cultural priorities. In the article "How Politics Affects Religion: Partisanship, Socialization, and Religiosity in America," Michele F. Margolis examines how a party identity affects the involvement of an important social group in politics. Religion is not only identity, but it is often the main component of political views in the United States. The relationship between religion and politics has changed dramatically over the last four decades. A new party coalition is created based on religiosity or religious participation. Religious socialization shows people’s relationships with religion – marked by membership and involvement in formal institutions – change as they develop and age. The religious life-cycle theory argues that teenagers and young adults distance themselves from both the religion in which they were raised and religious practice in general. Across multiple generations, young adults are the least likely to identify with a religious tradition, attend religious services, pray, and report religion being an important part of their lives, and decreases in religiosity occur across region of residence, religious denomination, relationship with parents, and parents’ religiosities. After comparing statistics data, it’s pretty clear that during period from 1965 to 1973, students belonging to both Republican and Democratic parties attended church nearly twice less often. There is often noticeable return to religion and to religious participation after marriage and during time of educating children, but sometimes it doesn’t happen at all. Religious identity and religious participation are pretty stable at the mature age . Party spirit can have an effect on religiosity. "The ‘impressionable years’ hypothesis claims – as the name suggests – that adolescents and young adults are highly impressionable and that outside influences and events can shape young people’s political outlooks, including partisan identification. The partyhood that is developing in young people’s lives is more than a political party, a powerful identity that often lasts a lifetime and influences other settings and behavior. The partnership generates economic assessments, confidence in the government, a sense of fairness in elections, consumption and spending. In America the Republican party associated with organized religious groups and religious values, while the Democratic party considered to be less religious and offer more liberal points of view. As religiosity became relevant to politics, religious voters became republicans, and less religious voters became democrats. The theory of the life cycle explains that politician can form a religious choice of the parties for their advantage in order to get votes. Politics can affect the level of religiosity at a certain time or stage of our life. George Yancey, Marie A. Eisenstein, and Ryan P. Burge, in "Christian Theology and Attitudes Toward Political and Religious Ideological Groups", have shown the influence of Christian theology on attitudes towards different ideological groups, both political and religious. The study describes how religious affiliation, behavior and belief in the United States affect voting and political party affiliation. Progressive Christians more often show an unfavorable attitude towards groups with political differences than conservative Christians. "The values of progressive Christians and their denominations have moved from claims of absolutism to an emphasis on tolerance and acceptance". On the other hand, conservative Christians more often show a negative attitude toward groups with religious differences compared with progressive Christians. Therefore, theological differences between Christians are often divided into different levels of conservatism and progressivism. "Progressive Christians emphasize human [desire] and tolerance as the source of their values". Rationality and human wisdom play important role when making choices and facing different social problems. Conservative Christians, as opposed to progressive, rely on "authoritative scripture as the last word of their moral vision". They stick to traditional thinking, according to which their beliefs should match with the information in the Bible. The importance of God’s word is a valuable indicator of the various Christian views and they form their attitude towards other political or religious groups. The adoption of the Bible as the greatest authority makes conservative Christians less prepared to be flexible in their search for truth. "This critical theological difference means conservative Christians are less likely to adopt modern social innovations such as same-sex marriage, abortion, and divorce, in part due to their allegiances to traditional values and practices in the Bible". Those who adopt a progressive form of Christianity may prioritize political goals more than those adopting a conservative Christian ideology. Although the United States is at the same time religiously diverse and very religious, "interreligious relations exhibit more comity than conflict". Modern Democrats usually refer to values of justice, tolerance, and the republicans to traditional conservative views. In America, religion is an important part of social life. Despite the constitutional dividing wall between church and state, national politicians refer to religion in great speeches. The President always asks God to bless America, sending his prayers to the victims of the disaster, accepting religious leaders and praising religious values. Such propaganda of religion is unheard of in Europe, but it may be because the majority is not religious and the native populations, as opposed to immigrants, are not very religious. The Christians of the United States under the banner of "the moral majority" have made a significant movement to influence political leaders since the 1970s and introduced religion into political debate. The religious disposition of immigrants mean that they are receptive to the conservative religious message and can be persuaded to vote across class lines. By doing that they support an agenda that favors the wealthy and makes them even poorer. American politicians talk a lot about religion. Nevertheless, they have nothing to do with theocracy, such as the Taliban. Paradoxically, the US conservatives went to war in Afghanistan to separate religion from politics abroad while strivnig to unite religion and politics at home. Many poor people in America risk losing their economic interests by voting for republican politicians who are interested in further concentrating wealth in the hands of the rich. They do so partially because the republicans appeal to their religious ideology. Studies show that democrats are less religious than republicans. This pattern arose from the fact that religious beliefs affect political identity, but there is also a reverse relationship. These articles show that religious relations can be formed by political identities. Partyhood tends to crystallize at a young age and early adulthood, when most young people in the United States move away from religion in which they were brought up and religious practice in general. However, when young people move into adulthood, they must decide whether to stay out of religion or return to the religious sphere. Political identity, which for many has been built since the young years, can help to form a new religious identity. The religious belonging increases in uncertain lives of the poor, since difficult living conditions are associated with increased religiousness. The worse their living conditions are the greater chances they will support the leading party. This seems to be another great reason for separating the church from the state. Party divisions for republicans and democrats do not simply reflect social disagreements, but they also help to create them. Americans can rely on their commitment to religious decisions, as long as parties and party elites recognize differences in issues related to religion and morals. The theory of the life cycle gives an explanation when politics most likely affects religion at the individual level, rejecting the assumption that politics should have a single effect for different types of people. Can you imagine living in a world where the most abundant and needed resource water was not available to you? This is the reality many people around the world are facing right now. Globalization has brought people of different cultures together and developed a new era in economic prosperity. However, globalization has some areas of concern, such as water scarcity, climate change, water pollution, and deforestation. Economic growth, population shifts, and climate change will contribute to severe shortage and degradation of global water supplies. Water is critical for many businesses because all goods require water in their production. As one of the world’s largest agricultural countries. Can you imagine living in a world where the most abundant and needed resource water was not available to you? This is the reality many people around the world are facing right now. Globalization has brought people of different cultures together and developed a new era in economic prosperity. However, globalization has some areas of concern, such as water scarcity, climate change, water pollution, and deforestation. Economic growth, population shifts, and climate change will contribute to severe shortage and degradation of global water supplies. Water is critical for many businesses because all goods require water in their production. As one of the world’s largest agricultural countries. China is faced with serious water scarcity due to the high population growth every year, while some regions of the world see danger through extensive droughts or water diseases. Also, the inability of public people has brought a rise in water-services privatization contracts between foreign investors and states. As an agricultural country, China needs more water resources to meet its local needs of growing domestic consumption. Currently, China is facing a shortage of water due to climate and rapid development. It’s a water shortage country as the per capita use of water resources of China is only 2,300 cubic meters, which is one of the world’s 13 most water-poor countries. The agricultural land use was reduced in 11 regions, of which four were absolute water scarcity regions, two water scarcity regions, and have water relative rich regions. We can end that the seven important crop planting regions including Henan, Heilongjiang, Shandong, Sichuan, Anhui, Hebei, and Jiangsu were water resource relative scarcity regions in the year 2007. Water resources aren’t managed sustainably in many parts of the world, lower groundwater table lead to desertification, problem of diffuse water pollution from agriculture. According to the World Water Council, 1.1 billion people in the world do not have appropriate drinking water and sanitation facilities, while 2.6 billion are without improved sanitation facilities, and over 5000 people die each day from water-related diseases, according to World Water Assessment Programme 2003. Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, and Mexico are getting depleted and Yemen could run of water in the next few years. "Taking a shorter shower is not the answer" to the global problem, said Hoekstra, a Dutch American Politician as one to four percent of person water footprint is in home while twenty-five percent person water footprint is through meat consumption. It takes fifteen thousand liters of water to make 1kg of beef. At night, viewed from space, the cluster of lights looks like a supernova erupting in North Dakota. The lights are as distinctive a feature of night-time North America as the glaring swathe of the northeast megalopolis. Less dense than those of Chicago, as expansive as those of Greater Atlanta, more coherent than the scattershot of illuminations that characterises the Midwest and the South, the exploding array of lights define both a geographic patch and a distinctive era of Earth’s history. Nearly all the evening lights across the United States are electrical. But the constellation above North Dakota is made up of gas flares. Viewed up close, they resemble monstrous Bunsen burners, combusting excess natural gas released from fracking what’s known as the Bakken shale, named after the farmer Henry Bakken, on whose land the rock formation was first discovered while drilling for oil in the 1950s. In 2014 the flares burned nearly a third of the fracked gas free. They constitute one of the most distinctive features of the US nightscape. We might call them the constellation Bakken. While the flares rise upward, the firefront is actually burning downward into the outgassing drill holes as surely as a candle flame burns down its tallow stalk. The flames are descending as rapidly as their fuels are rising. They are burning through deep time, combusting lithic landscapes from the geologic past and releasing their effluent into a geologic future. Eerily, the Bakken shale dates to the Devonian, the era that records the first fossil charcoal, our first geologic record of burnt material. Its gases will linger through the Anthropocene. In 1860 the English scientist Michael Faraday gave a series of public lectures in which he used a candle to illustrate the principles of natural philosophy. Fire was an apt exemplar because it integrates its surroundings, and it was apt, too, because in Faraday’s world, fire was everpresent. Every nook and cranny of the human world flickered with flames for lighting, heating, cooking, working, and even entertaining. But that was starting to change. By then, Britain had 10,000 miles of railways and the US had 29,000. Those locomotives demanded more fuels than the living landscape could supply. Engineers turned to ancient landscapes – to fossil biomass, notably coal – and they simplified fire into combustion. Today, a modern Faraday would not use a candle – probably couldn’t because the lecture hall would be outfitted with smoke detectors and automated sprinklers, and his audience wouldn’t relate to what they saw because they no longer have the lore of daily burning around them. For a contemporary equivalent he might well turn to a fracking flare, and to illustrate the principles behind Earthly dynamics he might track those flames as they burn down through the deep past of fire and humanity. Among the ancient elements, fire is the odd one out. Earth, water, air – all are substances. Fire is a reaction. It synthesises its surroundings, takes its character from its context. It burns one way in peat, another in tallgrass prairie, and yet another through lodgepole pine; it behaves differently in mountains than on plains; it burns hot and fast when the air is dry and breezy, and it might not burn at all in fog. It’s a shapeshifter. The intellectual idea of fire is a shapeshifter, too. The other elements have academic disciplines behind them. The only fire department on a university campus is the one that sends emergency vehicles when an alarm sounds. In ancient times, fire had standing with the other elements as a foundational axiom of nature. In 1720, the Dutch botanist Herman Boerhaave could still declare that: ‘If you make a mistake in your exposition of the Nature of Fire, your error will spread to all the branches of physics, and this is because, in all natural productions, Fire… is always the chief agent.’ By the end of the 18th century, fire tumbled from its pedestal to begin a declining career as a subset of chemistry and thermodynamics, and a concern only of applied fields such as forestry. Fire no longer had intellectual integrity: it was considered a derivation from other, more fundamental principles. Just at the time open fire began retiring from quotidian life, so it began a long recession from the life of the mind. Fire’s fundamentals reside in the living world. Life created the oxygen fire needs; life created the fuels. The chemistry of fire is a biochemistry: fire takes apart what photosynthesis puts together. When it happens in cells, we call it respiration. When it occurs in the wide world, we call it fire. As soon as plants colonised land in the Silurian period about 440 million years ago, they burned. They have burned ever since. Fires are older than pines, prairies and insects. But nature’s fires are patchy in space and time. Some places, some eras, burn routinely; others, episodically; and a few, only rarely. The basic rhythm is one of wetting and drying. A landscape has to be wet enough to grow combustibles, and dry enough, at least occasionally, to allow them to burn. Sand deserts don’t burn because nothing grows; rainforests don’t burn unless a dry spell leaches away moisture. Biomes rich in fine particles such as ferns, shrubs and conifer needles can burn easily and briskly. Landscapes laden with peat or encumbered with large trunks burn poorly, and only when leveraged with drought. As life and the atmosphere evolved, so did fire. When oxygen thickened in the Carboniferous period around 300 million years ago, dragonflies grew as large as seagulls, and fires swelled in like proportion such that 2 to 13 per cent of the era’s abundant coal beds consist of fossil charcoal. When grasses emerged in the Miocene, they lavished kindling that quickened fire’s spread. When animals evolved to feast on those grasses, fire and herbivores had to compete because that same biomass was fodder for each: it could go into gullets or up in flames but not both. Today, ecologists refer to landscape fire as a disturbance akin to hurricanes or ice storms. It makes more sense to imagine fire as an ecological catalyst. Floods and windstorms can flourish without a particle of life present: fire cannot; it literally feeds off hydrocarbons. So as atmosphere and biosphere have changed, as oxygen has ebbed and flowed, as flora and fauna have sculpted biomass into new forms, so fire has evolved, morphing into new species. Yet there was one requirement for fire that escaped life’s grasp, the spark of ignition that connected flame with fuel. Ignition relied on lightning, and lightning’s lottery had its own logic. Then a creature emerged to rig the odds in favour of fire. Just when hominins acquired the capacity to manipulate fire is unknown. But we know that Homo erectus could tend fires and, by the advent of Homo sapiens, hominins could make fire at will. A revolutionary phase-change all around. Until that Promethean moment, fire history had remained a subset of natural history, particularly of climate history. Now, notch by notch, fire gradually ratcheted into a new era in which natural history, including climate, would become subsets of fire history. In a sense, the rhythms of anthropogenic fire began to replace the Milankovitch climate cycles which had governed the coming and going of ice ages. A fire age was in the making. Earth had a new source of ecological energy. Places that were prone to burn but had lacked regular ignition (think Mediterranean biomes) now got it, and places that burned more or less routinely had their fire rhythms tweaked to suit their human fire tenders. Species and biomes began a vast reshuffling that defined new winners and losers. The species that won biggest was ourselves. Fire changed us, even to our genome. We got small guts and big heads because we could cook food. We went to the top of the food chain because we could cook landscapes. And we have become a geologic force because our fire technology has so evolved that we have begun to cook the planet. Our pact with fire made us what we are. We hold fire as a species monopoly. We will not share it willingly with any other species. Other creatures knock over trees, dig holes in the ground, hunt – we do fire. It’s our ecological signature. Our capture of fire is our first experiment with domestication, and it might may well be our first Faustian bargain. Still, ignition came with limits. Not every spark will spread; not every fire will behave as we wish. We could repurpose fire to our own ends, but we could not conjure fire where nature would not allow it. Our firepower was limited by the receptivity of the land, an appreciation lodged in many fire-origin myths in which fire, once liberated, escapes into plants and stones and has to be coaxed out with effort. Those limits began to fall away as people reworked the land to alter its combustibility. We could slash woods, drain peat, loose livestock – in a score of ways we could reconfigure the existing biota to increase its flammability. For fire history this is the essential meaning of agriculture, most of which, outside of floodplains, depends on the biotic jolt of burning to fumigate and fertilise. For a brief spell, the old vegetation is driven off, and a site is lush with ashy nutrients, and – temporarily – imported cultivars can flourish. In 1954, the US anthropologist Loren Eiseley likened humanity itself to a flame – spreading widely and transmuting whatever we touch. This process began with hunting and foraging practices, but sharpens with agriculture. Most of our domesticated crops and our domesticated livestock originate in fire-prone habitats, places prone to wet-dry cycles and so easily manipulated by fire-wielding humans. The way to colonise new lands was to burn them so that, for a while, they resembled the cultivars’ landscapes of origin. Yet again, there were limits. There was only so much that could be coaxed or coerced out of a place before it would degrade, and there were only so many new worlds to discover and colonise. If people wanted more firepower – and it seems that most of us always do – we would have to find another source of fuel. We found it by reaching into the deep past and exhuming lithic landscapes, the fossil fallow of an industrial society.Instead of redirecting or expanding fire, the conversion to industrial burning removed open flame, simplified it into chemical combustion, and stuffed it into special chambers. Instead of being constrained by the abundance of fuels, anthropogenic fire was constrained by sinks, the capacity of land, air and ocean to absorb its byproducts. The new combustion was no longer subject to the old ecological checks and balances. It could burn day and night, winter and summer, through drought and deluge. Its guiding rhythms were no longer wind, sun and the seasons of growth and dormancy, but the cycles of human economies.The transformation – call it the pyric transition – was as disruptive as the coming of aboriginal firestick and fire-catalysed farming, but it was more massive, much faster, and far more damaging. Some landscapes burned to their roots. Seasonally, skies were smoke palls. Frontier settlements vanished in flames. The pyric transition runs through fire history and Earth’s pyrogeography like a terminator.Eventually, as the new order prevailed, as it wiped flame away by technological substitution and outright suppression, the population of fires plummeted, leading to ecological fire famines. The transformation might have left Earth with too much generic combustion, and too much of its effluent lodged in the atmosphere, but the industrialised world also left too little of the right kind of fire where it’s needed.Promoting the steam engine developed with his business partner James Watt, in the late 1770s, Matthew Boulton boasted to the biographer James Boswell that they sold what all the world wanted – power. In 1820, a year after Watt died, Percy Shelley published Prometheus Unbound, in which he celebrated the unshackling of the unrepentant Titan who had brought fire to humanity. By then, the use of coal, and later oil, was liberating a generation of New Prometheans.This newly bestowed firepower came without traditional bounds. For a million years the problem before hominins had been to find more stuff to burn and to keep the flames bright. Now the problem became what to do with all the effluent of that burning and how to put flame back where it had been unwisely taken away.The new energy revolution leveraged every activity, like fire itself creating the conditions for its spread, each reinforcing the other. But the collateral damage in the form of wrecked landscapes could not be ignored. Engineers sought to keep fire within the machines, not loosed on the countryside. Countries, particularly those with extensive frontiers, public lands or colonial holdings, sought to shield their national estate from fire. They set lands aside to shelter them from promiscuous and abusive burning and sought to control fires when they occurred. State-sponsored conservation had considerable currency among progressive thinkers. When Rudyard Kipling wrote ‘In the Rukh’ (1893), a story that explained what became of The Jungle Book’s Mowgli after he grew up, he had him join the Indian Forest Department and fight against poaching and ‘jungle fires’. Only later would the paradoxes become palpable. Only later would overseers realise how hard they would have to struggle to reinstate fire for its ecological benefits.But the flames were only the visible edge of a planetary phase-change. The slopover that followed once Earth’s keystone species for fire changed its combustion habits is best known for destabilising climate. But humanity’s new firepower has a greater reach, and the knock-on effects are rippling through the planet’s biosphere independently of global warming. The new energy is rewiring the ecological circuitry of the Earth. It has scrambled ecosystems and is replacing biodiversity with a pyrodiversity – a bestiary of machines run directly or indirectly from industrial combustion. The velocity and volume of change is so great that observers have begun to speak of a new geologic epoch, a successor to the Pleistocene, that they call the Anthropocene. It might equally be called the Pyrocene. The Earth is shedding its cycle of ice ages for a fire age.The traditional view of North Dakota, as of the Great Plains generally, divides it into humid east and arid west with the border between them running roughly along the 100th meridian. It’s a division by water but it works for fire as well. It also marks a potential boundary between Pleistocene and Anthropocene.For Pleistocene Dakota, look east to the prairie pothole region. It’s a vestigial landscape of the ice sheets. The retreating ice left a surface dappled and rumpled with kettles, drumlins, eskers, potholes, kames and ridges that slowly smoothed into a terrain of swales and uplands. The swales filled with water. The uplands sprouted tallgrass prairie. Those ponds make the region a vital flyway for North American waterfowl. But keeping the wetlands wet is only half the management issue. The birds nest and feed in the uplands and, being clothed in tallgrass prairie, the uplands flourish best when routinely burned. Few of these fires start from lightning; the only viable source is people, who followed the retreating ice and set fire to the grasses. Those fires are themselves relics of a bygone epoch. They annually renew the living landscape that succeeded the dead ice.For Anthropocene Dakota, look west to the Bakken constellation. Not only is it a symbol of industrial combustion, but a major source of greenhouse gases and a catalyst for land-use change and all the rest of the upsets and unhingings and scramblings that add up to make the Anthropocene. The flares speak to the extravagance of industrial fire – burning just to burn in order to get more stuff to burn. It’s both a positive feedback and an eerily closed loop that accelerates the process and worsens its consequences. Instead of seasonal waterfowl, vehicles powered by internal combustion engines traverse the landscape ceaselessly. East and west represent two kinds of fires and two kinds of future for humanity as keeper of the planetary flame. One is a Promethean narrative that speaks of fire as technological power, as something abstracted from its setting, perhaps by violence, certainly as something held in defiance of an existing order. The other is a more primeval narrative in which fire is a companion on our journey and part of a shared stewardship of the living world.Sometime over the past century, we crossed the 100th meridian of Earth history and shed an ice age for a fire age. Landscape flames are yielding to combustion in chambers, and controlled burns, to feral fires. The more we burn, the more the Earth evolves to accept still further burning. It’s a geologic inflection as powerful as the alignment of mountains, seas and planetary wobbles that tilted the Pliocene into the cycle of ice ages that defines the Pleistocene.The era of the ice is also our era. We are creatures of the Pleistocene as fully as mastodons and polar bears. Early hominins suffered extinctions along with so many other creatures as the tidal ice rose and fell. But humans found in the firestick an Archimedean fulcrum by which to leverage their will. For tens of millennia we used it within the framework bequeathed by the retreating ice, and for more than a century we have been told that we thrived only in a halcyon age, an interglacial, before the ice must inevitably return.Gradually, however, that lever lengthened until, with industrial fire, we could unhinge even the climate and replace ice (with which we can do little) with fire (with which we can seemingly do everything). We can melt ice sheets. We can define geologic eras. We can, on plumes of flame, leave Earth for other planets. It seems Eiseley was right. We are a flame. It is vital to comprehend that the environment will be environment, tidiness, contamination and the absolute amount of the tree. Which is straightforwardly identified with our everyday life and influences it. Because of logical advancement, the quantity of plants, industrial facilities, and vehicles has expanded so much that these days ecological issues have emerged. People and the environment are subject to one another. In the event that there is a slight change in our environment, its immediate impact begins showing up on our bodies. Assuming the virus is more, we get cold. However, on the off chance that the warmth is more, we can’t bear it. The environment is the regular habitat that assists with developing, feeding and annihilating the earth. The regular habitat assumes an incredible part in the presence of life on Earth and it helps in creating people, creatures, and other living things. Individuals are influencing their current circumstances with a portion of their negative quirks and exercises. Environment alludes to the environment around us and the components contained in it and the living creatures in it. We incorporate air, land, water, creatures, birds, plants, and so forth surrounding us in our current circumstances. The manner in which we are influenced by our current circumstance, the manner in which our current circumstance is influenced by the demonstrations we do. The trees cut down for the wood are finishing the backwoods and the finish of the woodlands is influencing the existence of the animals living in the timberland. Numerous types of creatures have become wiped out and numerous species are very nearly extinct. Today, it is exceptionally normal for lions or cheetahs to enter the town and damage individuals living there. Yet, for what reason is this event? This is going on the grounds that we have removed their home from these animals and now these creatures are compelled to move towards towns and urban areas and are hurting people for their living. Environment implies the environment around us as well as our social and conduct environment. Every one of the components which influence humans is remembered for the environment, social, social, affordable, organic and physical. There are numerous explanations behind natural contamination which influences our current circumstance without a doubt. Deposits from man-caused production lines contaminate our current circumstance. Yet, it is likewise unrealistic that in this race of advancement, we ought to disregard our improvement to ensure our current circumstances. We can save our current circumstance from pollution by remembering a couple of things. The fireplaces of the manufacturing plants are low, because of which the smoke radiating from them spreads to the environment around us. In the present time, the house doesn’t have many individuals as there are more vehicles. The small kid of the house additionally prefers to drive at the spot of the bike. Smoke and harmful gases emerging from plants, production lines, and business regions have made ecological issues. There is a lot of smoke and harmful gas emerging from transports, charges, trucks, siphons, because of which the issue of contamination is getting more genuine. Sewer soil gets stirred up in the water of the streaming waterways so that the drinking water of people and creatures gets grimy because of which both become casualties of shortcoming, illness, and genuine infections. Inhabitants of ghettos in large urban areas have made this issue truly. Urbanization and modernization are significant reasons for ecological contamination. It has gotten normal for people to disregard the environment for their own convenience. Man has been chopping down trees without considering anything, however, he doesn’t believe that we get air from these trees to carry on with life. Expanding the populace is an extremely significant reason for contamination in our current circumstances. The issue of living and eating in a country where the populace is persistently expanding is additionally expanding. Man doesn’t offer significance to the environment for his conveniences, however, he fails to remember that without the environment, his solace is just for quite a while. The environment wherein we live is getting progressively tainted. We need to keep up and secure our current circumstances appropriately. In our country, the custom of ecological assurance has been continuing for a long time. Our predecessors have ensured them by thinking about different animals as riding divine beings and goddesses in different trees. Natural assurance is an interaction of improving the connection between people and the environment that has two purposes. The first is the administration of exercises that cause harm to the environment. Second, to make the way of life of the individual predictable with the characteristic arrangement of the environment, so the nature of the environment can be kept up. Smoke and substances from plants ought to be discarded appropriately. Diagnosing the issue of contamination and foulness is particularly expected to ensure our current circumstance. Plants ought to be introduced in all plants, industrial facilities, and business regions to control contamination. Smoke and harmful gases should be ousted straightforwardly into the sky through these plants. There ought to be an appropriate course of action for the support of transports, vehicles, trucks, bikes in huge urban areas and normal checking of them ought to likewise be finished. Green plants ought to be planted and large trees ought to be ensured. Boisterous clamors ought to be restricted and controlled for quiet living. All men, ladies, and youngsters should give their full help to secure the environment. There ought to be an arrangement of severe laws for the removal of poisonous and risky squanders. Public mindfulness ought to be made for the best utilization of assets. There ought to be less utilization of compound pesticides in horticulture. Backwoods the board should build wood regions. Prior to beginning the advancement designs, their effect on the environment ought to be surveyed. The man should attempt to decrease this issue with his endeavors. Industrial facilities that have been set up can’t be set up at different spots, yet now the public authority should take care that any new processing plants that are open ought to be away from the city. The contamination brought about by plants ought not influence individuals of the city. The man should attempt to diminish the contamination brought about without anyone else. Vehicles ought to be utilized as little as could be expected. This issue can likewise be diminished by utilizing public vehicles. Endeavors ought to be made by our researchers to control the smoke. The felling of woods ought to be seriously rebuffed and new trees ought to be planted. Governments have likewise passed a few laws to ensure the environment is safe. A Ministry is working for the insurance of the environment under the Central Government. For the arrangement of this issue, public help can end up being useful and valuable. The absence of improvement and advancement measures likewise presents difficulties. The quest for a more reasonable future may just be significant with regards to an extremely incredible endeavor to wipe out the improvement of methods for the end. Is a "tiny home" for you? Small houses have recently taken the housing market by storm, captured the imagination of alternative housing enthusiasts with its dollhouse façade, sustainable strategies, and quality craftsmanship. It is a trend that is sweeping home improve channels. Generally, between 10 to 40 meters, tiny homes come in diverse types of shapes. As more society moves into the city, living space becomes a precious commodity. The purpose of this essay is to identify the challenges of how talented architects and innovative inhabitants indulged themselves to design small but perfectly formed buildings. Today, minimalist architects have turned in a more focused way to establishing works that might be diminutive in their dimensions, but are definitely big when it comes to trendsetting ideas. They seek a unique concept of creating a home that is just as comfortable as it is functional and aesthetically pleasing. In fact, small houses are no longer synonymous with cheap houses and lack of privilege. Whether in Japanese cities, where large sites are hard to come by or at the frontier between art and architecture, small buildings present many advantages and push their designers to do more with less. Terence Conran said that just because living space is limited in scale, it does not have to limited in style. Small houses have always had a particular appeal. From the diminutive templates created by the ancient Greeks to the follies of the English romantic landscape, micro works of architecture inspire an enduring fascination that transgresses their function, even if that function is to be a pleasing decoration in landscape. There are a variety of reasons of the love-affair with little forms. Most obviously, the miniaturization of architecture reduces it to a human scale with which we can interact more readily. We are also drawn by the intricacy of their conception and detail and by the fact that smaller buildings usually possess a more tactile quality than constructions of larger scale. The concise purpose of these structures, that they address a single function, simple use or even a purely aesthetic aim, makes them psychologically as well as physically accessible. And yet that is not to say that they are static expressions. New approaches in architecture are usually reflected first in small buildings. The architectural brief of the residential building offers architects an opportunity to realize unusual concepts, to experiment with materials and forms, and to implement new ideas and space. Observers in other countries admire the rigor with which minimalist architects compose these small houses: in his final wooden house, for example, Sou Fujimoto takes up the theme “forest”, which he does not simply understand as an image but tries to embody the material. “Experiments” like these often form the basis for other designs and larger architectural tasks and hence for the evolution of architecture in general. For centuries architects have used the small form to experiment with space on a reduced scale, to explore the details of construction, the joy of materials and play of form. Although the design of even a modest house contains programmatic complexities, architects trying to achieve simplicity and unity of form and function find themselves faced with the ultimate design question, and it is perhaps in the built answers that we can experience the architect’s vision at its most distilled. A superb example of early experimentation in small houses that reflected one of the finest manifestations of the High Renaissance was the early-seventeenth-century tempietto of San Pietro in Montorio, Rome, built by Bramante. However miniature in size, the tempietto reflects a lofty goal: the reconciliation of humanist, pagan and Christian ideals in a single built feat. But despite the care and thought that little house embody, they are often overlooked or taken for granted in today’s ever more urbanized, global culture. In an urban context, small houses and functional structures are dwarfed by monumental civic architecture and the focus on function can take precedence over beauty. It may be easier to appreciate miniature homes in the tranquility of the landscape, where function is perhaps less important and contemplation is more readily induced, but either way, the small structure struggles to establish its significance against a backdrop of increasingly grand architectural gestures. The small house architects predominantly induce their ideas in creating a series of themes within a small but infinitely elastic framework. One of the oldest and perhaps most seemingly contradictory objectives for building is to facilitate spiritual or religious contemplation. The tiny homes demonstrates the use of lightweight materials and the pursuit of the self-contained, independent structure, evidence of the influence and rewards of such experimentation in design on a reduced scale. A tiny scrap of land might not catch our attention. The minimalist trend is not about destitution, yet it is about accomplishing beauty with less. Minimalist design denies the unnecessary ornate detailing, rather than allowing function to dictate its form. The layers are stripped back, portraying a profound sense of clarity and calmness. Minimalism is not a style, it is an attitude, a way of being. It is a fundamental reaction against noise, visual noise, disorder, vulgarity. Minimalism is the pursuit of the essence of things, not the appearance. It is the persistent search of purity, as an expression of uncontaminated being, the search of serenity, for silence as a presence, for the thickness of spaces, for space as immensity. The minimal design rediscovers the value in construction materials such as concrete, glass, steel, as the components are left exposed in interiors. When there is less things to distract the eye, each piece of furniture or materials has space to breathe, thusly, stands out in the compacted space. The focus alters the ambience of a room and the rare components that remained its colour, shape and texture. It refines an invigorating escape from the chaotic overstimulation of our everyday lives. Minimalism is beyond time- it is timeless, it is noble and simple materials, it is the stillness of perfection, it has to be being itself, uncovered by useless crusts, not naked but completely defined by itself, by its being. The design opportune to raw industrial aesthetic, as evidence in the refine layout of 1508 London’s award-winning Project Elizabeth (fig.2). The absence of excessive detailing and ornaments emphasized on the clean palette of high quality materials, spawn a splendid backdrop against to feature the art collection for the client. In contrast, minimalist interiors outlines a simplicity of form, colour, detailing and choice of materials. It seeks to eliminate the distraction of awkward proportions and the constant irritation of the catch that does not function unobtrusively. In its place he offers the comfort of exactness of small things done well. For Pawson, architectural reduction is a process that takes you through a mirror. You pass through a point at which a room is merely empty, and emerge out on the other side, in the mirror would to discover richness in the subtle differences between five shades of white, and the sense of release that comes from allowing a wall to flow in space unencumbered by visual distractions. Right from the start, Pawson has attempted an architecture whose power comes from exploring fundamental problems of space, proportion, light and materials, rather than allowing himself to be side tracked by stylistic mannerisms. In this understated kitchen in Project Khan (fig.3), the modernized flat-panel cabinetry and neutral colour palette retains the visual and sound to a minimum, creating a soothing ambience around the space. What is generally recognized is that ‘emptiness’ in architecture – or empty space – is not empty, but full: yet to realize this fullness requires the most exacting standards and discipline from the architect. Here, there can be no room for uncertainty, or anxious ‘artistic’ effects. Either the worst must be perfect, or not at all. Architecture is ‘frozen music’: the more you reduce, the more perfect its notes must be. "Less is more" by Robert Browning in his poem Andrea del Sarto, was idealized by the architect Mies van der Rohe in the 1940s has become one of the fundamental principles of minimalist architecture, encapsulating the idea of achieving an exceptional design through simplicity. So much more than ultra-modern white-box sterility, a skilfully executed minimalist interior will convey a sense of uncluttered elegance and serenity. Editing a space down to its bare essentials requires restraint and discipline, but the payoff is an interior that is balanced and beautiful.  (The Epistle, 18.1.2016). Minimalist John Pawson, awarded for his minimalist aesthetic design quoted ‘the excitement of empty space’. Pawson’s architecture is in this sense a cerebral one. Its restraint appears to deny the richer architectural flavours. But that is not to say that he eschews the physical qualities of design. Unlike those architects whose work is intellectually driven to the exclusion of all else, to the extent that it amounts to the cartoonlike realization of the proposition which entirely lacks the sensual and spatial qualities of architecture, Pawson has always managed to synthesize the two strands. In state-of-the-art, architecture was predestined for the masses, for the communal. Blocks of buildings were designed and constructed instantaneously and economically with the same appearance and materials. Society are seeking for own regions and local traditions for inspirations. We live in the era of globalization where everyone wants the same thing. The demand for small homes in Japan results partly from land scarcity, property prices ad taxes, as well as the impending danger posed by the country’s regular earthquakes and typhoons. That is where design is moving – people simply prefer smaller homes and seeking a minimalist lifestyle. Rising population mean cities are overcrowded, for example in Japan, there are 1.9 million of one to two person households, with a housing supply of 1 million one bedroom apartments, resulting in a shortage. The solution comes back to Tiny Homes and is the reason for its modern revitalization. People from all over the world wants to live in Tokyo city, thus architects thrives to develop scalable housing that is safe, affordable and innovative to meet client needs. For no matter how small the room, providing your eye could travel freely around it, the space it contained was limitless. He was repeating, in effect, the premise underlying medieval monasticism that the monk, who sat in his cell, was free to travel everywhere. Here, at last, I felt, was someone who understood that a room – any room, anywhere – should be a space in which to dream. It was a real thing: a room with "wabi". I walked around the walls, watching its places, shadows and proportions in a state of near-elation. To his friendship with the architect, Shiro Kuramata, he owes the insight that you can make the most daring experiments with new materials and new technology without having to sacrifice the spirit of "poverty". Traditional Japanese design with its clean forms and simplicity was a predecessor of minimalism. The theory was influenced by the spare aesthetic of Japan’s traditional Zen Buddhism from the reflection of Japanese culture where inspiration came from the United States. The creativity of Japanese architects is acknowledge by the design of the buildings and capability of creating possibilities through tiny spaces. The minimalist architects plays the boundary of spaces, exploit unusual materials and cultivate new concepts for living together. The short life of residential buildings has driven to a colossal collection of architectural ideas and tiny houses documents the approaches. Japanese residential buildings are to be known as seismograph of current trends in architecture. "If you tried to build a normal house on a super-small plot of land, it would end up being really cramped. So in order to make the house as roomy as possible, we have to think up new structures and assembly," quoted by Yamashita. Compared to European architects, Japanese architects have a somewhat easier time realizing their visions as residential buildings. First, there are hardly any design guidelines; second, Japanese clients who hire an architect know exactly what they are getting into. They want special houses that stand out from the brown and green masses; hence they are prepared to accept that the architecture will not function exclusively as a subordinate shell but will at time even demand a symbiosis, an adaption of living habits. This different way of thinking about sustainability in Japan can, of course, be regarded critically as well, but anyone who looks at the effective use of energy in Japanese tiny homes cannot demonize it entirely. The greater tolerance of their clients – with regard to sacrifices of comfort, for example – means more design freedom for architects. The small houses simply can be adapted to the changing living conditions and hence can be seen as the liveliest and most spontaneous element in the urban fabric. "Asymmetrical pieces of land can often be obtained cheaper than others. And it is an architect’s job to work with the land and fulfil the client’s request," says Yamashita. But in recent years, Japanese minimalist architects have turned inevitability into an asset, striving to design unorthodox and visually spectacular tiny homes on remarkably congested land by redefining the rules of designing Japan’s dwellings. Miniature homes conserve space by eliminating conventional elements like hallways, entranceways, closets and inner walls. Architects indulge in ordinary vision by idealizing asymmetrical walls, translucent facades, and cantilevered floors to exploit natural lightings. Windows, were prefabricated in various shapes and sizes, concealed near the base and scattered across walls and façade of the building as openings. Furniture are specially made and can be folded into the wall, allowing more space in a room. A bathroom can be separated by having a glass partition or curtain. Sightlines that extend the length of the house, focusing on the spaces that borrow from adjacent spaces. The importance of sports is one of those topics that cannot be stressed enough and with good reason. Exercise is not only good for you it is important if you want to stay healthy throughout your life. Every life phase has its own limits but thankfully people figured out exercise techniques that will suit almost anybody. Merely listing all the benefits will not be enough for you to understand why it is important to work out as often as possible. The thing is, there are complex physiological changes that happen on a biological level that make the sports so good for us. So, I would like to talk about exercise in depth and explain further what exactly makes such activities good for you. Modern man is placed in an urban setting that restrains his movement and inhibits his ability to use his body to the fullest. When you look at urbanization historically Homo Sapiens has been around for at least a 100 thousand years and out of that we have lived in an urban surrounding (a city) for the past 10 thousand years. Mankind led a nomadic lifestyle for most of its existence and this certainly makes our bodies predisposed for certain things. This is not just a point to think about but an actual fact that demonstrates the importance of sports and has implications for our health. The human body needs regular exercise because we tend to eat far more than our modern and urban living demands of us. Therefore, we constantly have access to energy that will build up over time and cause different health problems. On the other hand, recent research shows that regular exercise helps the body to regulate its homeostasis by flushing out certain hormones that build up because of the stressful jobs people have. One of the importance of sports is a healthy mind. Recent research on mental illness shows the importance of sports for the treatment of general depression, anxiety, and addiction-related disorders. Because of the hormone endorphin that helps the body restore its serotonin and dopamine production through the inhibition of cortisol. That might sound complicated but the bottom line is that the body reacts to exercise similarly to how it reacts to antidepressants or opioids, therefore it is helpful for stimulating certain areas of the brain. Exercise is not only good as a type of prevention for sickness it can also be used as medicine. There are some martial arts that base their philosophy on taming the mind through the body. One such discipline is Judo and it originated in Japan from the classical forms of Jiu-Jitsu. The founding father of this martial art had an enlightened philosophy behind his teachings and he thought that he could make people stop fighting each other by developing their self- confidence through the practice of a defensive fighting form. His vision has not yet been fulfilled but the benefits of Judo for peoples mental and physical health have been noted and applied in practices. Some countries and educational systems have made this sport a mandatory part of their curriculum. Facts like those prove the importance of sports. In many countries, a big proportion of expenditure is being spent on exploring the space. It is argued that this expenditure should be spent on other important things rather than on space exploration. However, in my opinion, keep other significant things in mind, space program is very crucial and important for the whole world and should be funded due to the fact that it will help to improve the communication between countries in the world and also helping to search a new alternate to live. To begin, a reason to support funding space program is communication between all over the globe. Because business and organizations are being expanded geographically, they need a communication channel to run these businesses in an effective manner. It has become possible after launching satellites in the orbit. For instance, NASA, which is a reputed space organization has launched many satellites in the orbit, which are being used to broadcast the signals in the form of audio and video to across the globe. Moreover, the satellite television has only become possible due the space programs, and people are able to watch the global events instantly from anywhere. Thus, it can be said that by doing the space exploration, world communication has utterly been changed and for this reason it should be financially aided. Furthermore, As global warming has become a serious concern for the whole world, scientist have started to find the alternate planet to live. Due to this fact, there are going to be conducted more space programs and eventually more money is needed to support these programs. For instance, ISRO, which is an Indian space research organization has been funded by the Indian government. As a result, they have managed to launch own satellite without help of other countries. In addition, there is a need to resolve the problem of global warming and this could only be possible if more space programs will be aided financially. Thus, it has been important for every country to give financial support to these programs so that the next generation can live in a better place.
