An instructor from at the Kapiti Aerodrome, Scott, led my dad, grandpa, mum, sister, and I into a small white room, with a table placed in the centre. Here he laid out a large picture showing the various controls of a small 4 seater plane that I’d come to fly. After 10 minutes of detailed discussion about the throttle, oil, aerolons, flaps, and other gadgets, he showed my grandpa, dad, and I out onto the asphalt, while my mum and sister played Bananagrams in an empty waiting room. Scott opened the door of Cessna 172 that sat on a worn down patch of grass, and my dad and grandpa clambered over the front seats to a bench at the back. Next he took the co-pilot's seat,  I took the pilot’s, and he began unravelling headset cables so we’d be able to communicate mid flight. As Scott began some procedures with the air traffic control tower, I pondered the various number of switches, buttons, levers that covered the cabin; it was like learning a new alphabet. Then we discovered an issue: because I was only ten at the time, my feet couldn’t reach the pedals that control the plane on the ground, so Scott took care of taxiing us down to the other end of the runway. From there, I slowly pushed in the throttle until it wouldn’t go any more. The twin bladed propellor spun furiously and houses flashed past us as we picked up speed. Then about three quarters of the way down the runway I pulled back the yoke, the nose began to rise, and we took off. The loud crashing waves I’d seen from land were now  only white lines silently breaking when they hit the beach. Once the altimeter on my right read 1,500 feet, we leveled off the plane and banked left as a muffled voice came through our headsets. “Northerly winds of 7 knots.” Unfortunately when we reached the south side of Kapiti Island, I forgot this, so when I let go of the yoke, the plane started to roll sideways. However Scott did nothing and calmly said, “Hey. You’re driving this machine...” My hands quickly jumped back to position, and righted the plane. After another few minutes of flying back to the mainland, we banked left again, idled the engine for landing, then hit the runway with a loud thud. Along the bottom of my south wall (which has a big kink in it) lies piles of dusty electronics, drawings, speedcubes, and my dad’s regularly played guitar. Opposite, my bed sits up against a plywood wall yet to be vanished, and an unpainted sliding door adjacent to it that connects my room to my sister’s. On the floor next to my bed is a pile of books that didn’t make it to my bedside table, which is already crowded with instruction manuals, keys, badges, guitar picks, and playing cards. In the far corner of my room is a small coffee table which my custom lego city sits on. Six wire drawers next to that store my clothes and books. I have chosen to write about Tama Tu, a short film by Taika Waititi, about the six soldiers in the maori battalion.  I noticed that the main tikanga concepts in the film were whanau and mana. Whanau is the concept of family, although it goes beyond just blood relationships, friends, teachers, and other people can be part of one large whanau. Manaakitanga is more or less the translation of “respect” from english, although it can go deeper in generosity, and kindness. Manaakitanga appears in Tama Tu between 8:00 and 8:50. One of the soldiers on guard, ready to shoot any enemies he can see. Although when he sees one crawling forward in the direction of their hiding place, he begins to pull the trigger, but notices that the soldier is only trying to play with, or protect a cat. Then he shows manaakitanga to the soldier, and realises that he has no good reason to shoot the enemy. Then, after lowering his gun, the enemy soldier is shot by someone else, it is unclear whether the soldier was from a different country, or one of his comrades, but either way he is surprised, and puts his head down to pay his respects to the dead soldier. I noticed an example of whanau at 5:15. First, one of the soldiers nods his head at another. Over the next minute, a chain is set off. One person nods at another, who nods at another, and so on. This, and the way they all behave together shows that the six men are part of the same whanau. Not necessarily blood related, but very close. As Taika Waititi describes them, they have "a special bond, strengthened by their character, their culture and each other." These two concepts often go hand in hand, members of the same whanau will show manaakitanga for each other, respect and look after them. And people you often show manaakitanga to are likely to be part of your whanau. Without manaakitanga, a whanau may weaken, or fall apart. Whanau is important to me, because I have an example in my own life. My Mum’s second cousin's son, my third cousin, is very distant in terms of blood relationship. Although I know him and his family, almost as well as I know my own. Because of this, and all the time we spend together, tramping, playing frisbee, we share the same manaakitanga, as we do with our blood relatives. If Te Tiriti O Waitangi was followed instead of the english translation, I think Maori would have more power over New Zealand, perhaps leading to more equality. And because of this, New Zealand might have seemed less appealing to the british settlers, meaning less immigrants, and more yet power over NZ for Maori. Another result of following Te Tiriti is the landscape of New Zealand would be very different. Due to more power with the Maori, and less land being sold to the british settlers, Maori tribes would likely have made a big effort to protect the native forest, wetlands, and other natural resources. On top of that, more native animals, some of which are now extinct, might still be alive if given the chance. For example, at one point in the 20th century, there were only eight Tui in Wellington; now, they are one of the most common birds in the city. An effect of the protection of the natural environment, might be that towns and cities wouldn’t be as dense, potentially causing them to spread out and occupy more land than currently. Greenhouse gas emissions would likely be lower due to considerably less dairy farming (started by the british settlers when they arrived) which, in 2019 made up 10 percent of our emissions. At the beginning of the lesson I was undecided about whether I agreed or disagreed with moral absolutism, because exceptions for universal rules became clear quite quickly. Although after more discussion we discovered some rules that may be universal, such as “discrimination is wrong,” for this rule we struggled to find a situation where discrimination was right. Now I think I mostly relate to absolutism, because although there are very few universal rules, there are some. Science and technology has come a long way, and can even learn on it’s own, which shows how powerful it is and how much it can do for us. Technology is being developed to capture carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, and redirect it into the ocean where it can be stored and reused for later us. Depending on what type of bread is used in the bruschetta, it may contain more simple complex carbohydrates which are broken quickly and provide short term energy, or complex carbohydrates which take longer to digest, but provide a longer lasting source of energy. Either way, the digestion of these carbs begins in the mouth where amylase is released from the saliva and break the carbs down into glucose. My name is Toby, and I am a year 7 student in Karaka. I am applying for the digital team and the finance team. I know that I have the skills required to become a member of these teams, and I would really enjoy my roles. The first team I would like to apply for is the digital team. I can solve problems, and I have a lot of knowledge and experience with many different pieces of technology and operating systems. In my spare time I love playing around with pieces of software and hardware, and figuring out how they work. Last year in year six, I was part of the tech team and proved myself capable of all the skills I need. The second role I would like to apply for is the finance team. I am good at maths and very organised. I have a lot of knowledge, I am hard working, and I am willing to co-operate and discuss with my leader and fellow members. If given the chance, I would be the perfect candidate for this role. I strongly believe that I would be the best member for these roles, and I would really enjoy them. I accept that I don´t know everything, and I am also looking forward to learning more as well using the knowledge I already have. On the 4th of October 1957, 7:28pm, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1, the first manmade object in outer space. The space age was born. The next year NASA was created and only eleven years after that, American astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin took the first steps on the moon while their lunar module pilot Michael Collins circled the moon awaiting their return. As the space age continued, the technology continued to advance, and today at least three people are living and exploring aboard the International Space Station at any one time. With the climate change emergency growing more urgent, and the expectation of it being irreversible in eleven years, we need a Plan B. Many companies and government agencies such as NASA, SpaceX, and the Gateway Foundation are already making plans to inhabit different regions of our solar system. NASA’s Artemis program planning to land the next man and the first woman on the moon by 2024; SpaceX’s plans to colonise Mars with its Starship and Super Heavy rockets; and the Gateway Foundation’s plan to house thirty-thousand people in an Earth-orbiting space station, are all very bold ideas, but with big potential. The International Space Station is a space station developed by NASA and the Soviet Union, but has been visited by 239 people across 19 countries. In the last twenty years, hundreds of experiments and spacewalks have been conducted in order to research, take photographs, and fix vital parts of the space station. In 2015, the crew of Expedition 44 grew and ate the first fresh food in a microgravity environment: lettuce. Then in 2018 three small robots  called astrobees measuring thirty-two centimeters across, were launched to the International Space Station to assist astronauts with their daily work. If we are going to colonize other planets or areas of outer space, we need to create an infrastructure. Many companies, and government agencies such as NASA have proposed ideas for infrastructure on other celestial bodies like asteroids, our moon, and Mars, some of which are going ahead, and others are still in progress. One common idea for power supplies is nuclear fusion and fission, the difference being that fusion joins atoms, and fission splits atoms letting off radioactive waste. Another common concept is asteroid mining, but the technology hasn’t advanced enough to be used frequently. However NASA’s OSIRIS-Rex craft is orbiting and analysing asteroid Bennu for a place to take a sixty gram sample, and return to earth in late 2023. Based on a survey I did, over 50% of the  people said they thought that humans would colonize another planet. Some people may think that the idea of leaving earth is not a good one, but we need to be open minded, Buzz Aldrin once quoted “Your mind is like a parachute, if it isn’t open it doesn’t work.” With NASA going back to the moon, and SpaceX going to Mars by 2024, I believe that space travel will be a big part of our future. According to the 2018 census, every year 54% of Wellington drives to work every day. In comparison, only 2.5% of Wellington bikes to work every day. In Amsterdam, nearly 60% of people bike daily, in other words, Wellington is nearly as committed to driving as Amsterdam is to biking. This imbalance means a negative impact on our environment, low efficiency in transportation, and not using roads to their full capacity. This is why I believe there should be more cycleways in Wellington. Wellington emits over 250,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide per year, from people driving. That’s just under a quarter of Wellington’s CO2 emissions, 1.1 million tonnes. By reducing the amount of car lanes, and increasing the amount of cycleways, these numbers could be reduced dramatically. And if this was done worldwide, it could play a big part in meeting the Paris Agreement’s goal of limiting the increase in global average temperature since pre-industrial levels, to less than 2 degrees celcius. An adult should aim to get at least 30 minutes of moderate exercise per day. If you commute by bike, most people would get at least that without having to take time out of work. There are also many studies that have shown that cycling can improve your mental wellbeing, heart and lung health, bone and muscle growth, and more. Most cars can hold at least 5 people, however the average number of people in a car is only 1 or 2, the same capacity as a bike. Because of this and the fact that bikes are much smaller than cars, you can fit 5 times as many people on a road per 100 meters. Another advantage of a bike’s small size is parking. One parking space would be able to fit 10 bikes, which is a much better use of space, and would give more people access to town at any one time. If you are driven to school, extracurricular activities, or other places, compare your options: By car, you start driving, get stuck in a long line of traffic, drive around the block looking for a car park, then pay $4.50 an hour for it. By bus, you walk to the bus stop, complain about the bus being late, pay for the bus ride, wait impatiently as the bus winds its way through town, then arrive half a kilometer away from where you wanted to be. By bike, you skip all the traffic, lock your bike at the front door, and don’t pay a cent. In 2015 I visited The Netherlands, where bikes, public transport, and pedestrians dominate cars. It works, and for good reason. 
