These were the confused thoughts of Norbit as he woke up for the first time. He’s not moving… said Louis, slightly concerned. Programming Director, Eli, paused for a moment, he was designed to be as much like a human as possible. I suspect he’ll be still taking everything in. Louis had never exactly known what the nature of this humanoid would be. He had only been employed to construct it. He had been at work for days without leaving, fixing every tiny problem until Norbit was ready. Sunlight shone through the open windows of the studio and reflected off the robot's metal skin. Finally, a motor whirred, and hinges creaked as Norbit rolled over onto his front. His limbs moved slowly and steadily, but with the strength of an elephant. With one strong thrust of Norbit’s arms, he had launched himself into a standing position. His torso swiveled around and his eyes met Eli’s. Hello, my name is Norbit. said the robot cheerily. Louis was quick to reply. We know that Norbit. How? I’ve never met you before. Norbit, we created you, said Eli. This confused Norbit even further, he was certain that was not possible – humans weren’t made like that. You’re not a human, Norbit, you are a robot. Along the bottom of my south wall lies piles of dusty electronics, drawings, speedcubes, and my dad’s regularly played guitar. Opposite, my bed sits up against a plywood wall yet to be vanished, and an unpainted sliding door adjacent to it, connecting my room to my sister’s. On the floor next to my bed is a pile of books that didn’t make it to my bedside table, which is already crowded with instruction manuals, keys, badges, guitar picks, and playing cards. In the far corner of my room is a small coffee table which my custom lego city sits on. Six wire drawers next to that store my clothes and books. Monday means maths at lunch time. A break from the concepts we learnt years ago. Tuesday is language day. From level five, down to level one, then back up to five, down to one then all the way back up to level four. Wednesday gives me far more time than I need in the morning, lots of time to experiment with software I’ve barely used. The Ngaruroro River begins in the Kaweka ranges and flows out into the ocean near Napier, 164 kilometers later. This long river provides many activities, such as rafting, camping nearby, or going hiking alongside it in the Kaweka Forest Park. If you’d like to go rafting or kayaking there are many places you can go, but one I've done before is easy and takes about an hour to complete. You begin about 5km down from the Matipiro golf course, and finish by a deep swimming hole with a small cliff next to it for diving. Nearby is a public campsite with running water, multiple long-drops, a flying fox, easy access to the river, and the summery smell of dry grass.If you want to go for a walk, you can go for a quick walk along the river, although you'll have to cross some water before long. Or, you go into the Kaweka Forest Park, where there are plenty of tracks for everyone. Ranging from a quick hour-long loop, to tramping for hours to stay in one of the many DOC huts. If you’d like to learn more about this, then have a look here. An instructor from at the Kāpiti Aerodrome, Scott, led my dad, grandpa, mum, sister, and I into a small white room, with a table placed in the centre. Here he laid out a large picture showing the various controls of a small 4 seater plane that I’d come to fly. After 10 minutes of detailed discussion about the throttle, oil, aerolons, flaps, and other gadgets, he showed my grandpa, dad, and I out onto the asphalt, while my mum and sister played Bananagrams in an empty waiting room.  Scott opened the door of Cessna 172 that sat on a worn down patch of grass, and my dad and grandpa clambered over the front seats to a bench at the back. Next he took the co-pilot's seat, I took the pilot’s, and he began unravelling headset cables so we’d be able to communicate mid flight. As Scott began some procedures with the air traffic control tower, I pondered the various number of switches, buttons, levers that covered the cabin; it was like learning a new alphabet. Then we discovered an issue: because I was only ten at the time, my feet couldn’t reach the pedals that control the plane on the ground, so Scott took care of taxiing us down to the other end of the runway.  From there, I slowly pushed in the throttle until it wouldn’t go any more. The twin bladed propellor spun furiously and houses flashed past us as we picked up speed. Then about three quarters of the way down the runway I pulled back the yoke, the nose began to rise, and we took off. The loud crashing waves I’d seen from land were now only white lines silently breaking when they hit the beach. Once the altimeter on my right read 1,500 feet, we leveled off the plane and banked left as a muffled voice came through our headsets.  Northerly winds of 7 knots.  Unfortunately when we reached the south side of Kāpiti Island, I forgot this, so when I let go of the yoke, the plane started to roll sideways. However Scott did nothing and calmly said, Hey. You’re driving this machine... My hands quickly jumped back to position, and righted the plane. After another few minutes of flying back to the mainland, we banked left again, idled the engine for landing, then hit the runway with a loud thud. If Te Tiriti O Waitangi was followed instead of the english translation, I think Māori would have more power over New Zealand, perhaps leading to more equality. And because of this, New Zealand might have seemed less appealing to the british settlers, meaning less immigrants, and more yet power over NZ for Māori. Another result of following Te Tiriti is the landscape of New Zealand would be very different. Due to more power with the Māori, and less land being sold to the british settlers, Māori tribes would likely have made a big effort to protect the native forest, wetlands, and other natural resources. On top of that, more native animals, some of which are now extinct, might still be alive if given the chance. For example, at one point in the 20th century, there were only eight Tui in Wellington; now, they are one of the most common birds in the city. An effect of the protection of the natural environment, might be that towns and cities wouldn’t be as dense, potentially causing them to spread out and occupy more land than currently. Greenhouse gas emissions would likely be lower due to considerably less dairy farming which, in 2019 made up 10 percent of our emissions. Science and technology has come a long way, and can even learn on it’s own, which shows how powerful it is and how much it can do for us. Technology is being developed to capture carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, and redirect it into the ocean where it can be stored and reused for later use. If climate change continues, and we don’t manage to become amulti-planetary species, meaning to colonise other planets as well as Earth, the results could be fatal. Steven Hawking said that it will be difficult enough to avoid disaster in the next 100 years, let alone the next thousand or million. So becoming a multi-planetary species is essential to human survival.The United Nations predict that by 2050 Earth's population will have reached 9.7 billion people. Earth's current population is 7.6 billion, this means that in 32 years earth's population will have increased by 2.1 billion people. We have housing problems already so just imagine the housing problems with an extra 2.1 billion people. Earth's maximum population is 10 billion, so overpopulation could be one of the biggest problems our planet is facing.Mars can help.The ozone layer is one of the most important parts of Earth's atmosphere. It blocks out 90 percent of the sun's harmful UV rays entering Earth's atmosphere making it possible to walk outside without getting severe sunburn in only a few minutes. If the ozone layer is completely destroyed as a result of global warming, the results could be deadly to humans unless we manage to delve deeper into outer space and colonise another planet.Mars will help.Rovers and landers that are currently exploring Mars are working at a very slow rate. So by having humans working on the surface of Mars, we could learn more about Mars in a month than what the Phoenix lander learnt in a year. So becoming a multi-planetary species could be a big opportunity for space exploration. According to the 2018 census, every year 54% of Wellington drives to work every day. In comparison, only 2.5% of Wellington bikes to work every day. In Amsterdam, nearly 60% of people bike daily, in other words, Wellington is nearly as committed to driving as Amsterdam is to biking. This imbalance means a negative impact on our environment, low efficiency in transportation, and not using roads to their full capacity. This is why I believe there should be more cycleways in Wellington. Wellington emits over 250,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide per year, from people driving. That’s just under a quarter of Wellington’s CO2 emissions, 1.1 million tonnes. By reducing the amount of car lanes, and increasing the amount of cycleways, these numbers could be reduced dramatically. And if this was done worldwide, it could play a big part in meeting the Paris Agreement’s goal of limiting the increase in global average temperature since pre-industrial levels, to less than 2℃. An adult should aim to get at least 30 minutes of moderate exercise per day. If you commute by bike, most people would get at least that without having to take time out of work. There are also many studies that have shown that cycling can improve your mental wellbeing, heart and lung health, bone and muscle growth, and more. Most cars can hold at least 5 people, however the average number of people in a car is only 1 or 2, the same capacity as a bike. Because of this and the fact that bikes are much smaller than cars, you can fit 5 times as many people on a road per 100 meters. Another advantage of a bike’s small size is parking. One parking space would be able to fit 10 bikes, which is a much better use of space, and would give more people access to town at any one time. If you are driven to school, extracurricular activities, or other places, compare your options: By car, you start driving, get stuck in a long line of traffic, drive around the block looking for a car park, then pay $4.50 an hour for it. By bus, you walk to the bus stop, complain about the bus being late, pay for the bus ride, wait impatiently as the bus winds its way through town, then arrive half a kilometer away from where you wanted to be. By bike, you skip all the traffic, lock your bike at the front door, and don’t pay a cent. In 2015 I visited The Netherlands, where bikes, public transport, and pedestrians dominate cars. It works, and for good reason. On the 4th of October 1957, 7:28pm, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1, the first manmade object in outer space. The space age was born. The next year NASA was created and only eleven years after that, American astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin took the first steps on the moon while their lunar module pilot Michael Collins circled the moon awaiting their return. As the space age continued, the technology continued to advance, and today at least three people are living and exploring aboard the International Space Station at any one time. With the climate change emergency growing more urgent, and the expectation of it being irreversible in eleven years, we need a Plan B. Many companies and government agencies such as NASA, SpaceX, and the Gateway Foundation are already making plans to inhabit different regions of our solar system. NASA’s Artemis program planning to land the next man and the first woman on the moon by 2024, SpaceX’s plans to colonise Mars with its Starship and Super Heavy rockets, and the Gateway Foundation’s plan to house thirty-thousand people in an Earth-orbiting space station, are all very bold ideas, but have big potential. The International Space Station is a space station developed by NASA and the Soviet Union, but has been visited by 239 people across 19 countries. In the last twenty years, hundreds of experiments and spacewalks have been conducted in order to research, take photographs, and fix vital parts of the space station. In 2015, the crew of Expedition 44 grew and ate the first fresh food in a microgravity environment: lettuce. Then in 2018 three small robots were launched to the International Space Station to assist astronauts with their daily work. If we are going to colonize other planets or areas of outer space, we need to create an infrastructure. Many companies, and government agencies such as NASA have proposed ideas for infrastructure on other celestial bodies like asteroids, our moon, and Mars, some of which are going ahead, and others are still in progress. One common idea for power supplies is nuclear fusion and fission, the difference being that fusion joins atoms, and fission splits atoms letting off radioactive waste. Another common concept is asteroid mining, but the technology hasn’t advanced enough to be used frequently. However NASA’s OSIRIS-Rex craft is orbiting and analysing asteroid Bennu for a place to take a sixty gram sample, and return to earth in late 2023. Based on a survey I did, over 50% of the people said they thought that humans would colonize another planet. Some people may think that the idea of leaving earth is not a good one, but we need to be open minded, Buzz Aldrin once quoted Your mind is like a parachute, if it isn’t open it doesn’t work. With NASA going back to the moon, and SpaceX going to Mars by 2024, I believe that space travel will be a big part of our future. Earth is our home, and our lives depend on it, but that statement could easily change.
